right you are live with BBC News as
we've been uh reporting two further
hostages have reportedly been released
this evening that's according to Hamas
uh those individuals uh we have not uh
at the moment received any uh
independent verification on that but
those details have been coming through
in the last hour 90 minutes or so I'm
we're going to talk now with someone who
has extensive experience in trying to
negotiate for the release of hostages
from Gaza Albert Matan he is a
co-founder of the conflict mediation
group forward thinking thank you very
much for coming on the
program thank you for the invitation so
since we uh we invited you this
developing news in the last 90 minutes
as I mention two more hostages released
according to Hamas we await uh
independent verification of that whilst
we do what's your reaction to it well I
think it's a good sign and it's exactly
a week go today I was in DOA and I
conveyed through channels the desire to
release all of the civilan hostages and
without any preconditions so I hopeful
hopefully this could be the beginning
but it takes two two Tango as to say if
I can put it that way um you know that
without the willingness on both sides to
secure the safe Passage of all the
civilian hostages I think people will be
in
danger okay can you take us as it were
into the room where it's happening
behind the curtain what what we received
in in in from the social media account
uh the Hamas statement they talked about
Qatar Egypt
mediation what what does that mean
what's going on well it it means
messages are passed um there's never
direct engagement between
um Israeli officials and Hamas officials
they don't meet together they have
always used intermediaries to pass
messages and it's a longterm usually
long term because usually there uh quid
proquo you know what do we get for this
who do we get and so forth in this
particular case I understand I think it
was the the operatives who went into
Israel committed the atrocities and I
think it's inexcusable The Taking
indiscriminately of civilians um that
they they made a mistake and the way I
would see it is that Hamas are Keen to
hand back all the civilian hostages now
I stress civilian as opposed to the
military okay that's that's an important
distinction you mentioned quid
proquo would it be your understanding
that the
uh four people released if if we do get
confirmation of the latest two that
there will be something in place then
and and what what could that be well
leis from the conversations I had in DOA
I I think the the fact they civilians
there were to be no conditions they were
going to be handed back as soon as
conditions um allowed for the safety
because you wouldn't keep 200 or it
won't be 200 it'll be I don't know how
many civilians but you would not keep
them all in the same place so it's a
question of how do you move such numbers
around Gaza do you release them 2 by two
or whatever I would hope not I would
hope that we could have a ceasefire that
we could create conditions in which a
process of exchange could take place and
I say that should take place in these
circumstances without any conditions
interesting you've made the distinction
civilian and not what therefore is the
process and protocol around non civilian
hostages well the practice of taking
soldiers and I'm explaining it not
endorsing it not justifying it but the
practice of capturing Israeli soldiers
was simply to use those young people as
leverage to release Palestinian
prisoners from Israeli jails currently
before this um outbreak um of cycle of
violence you might say renewal of that
cycle um there were about
4,000 um is
Palestinian um prisoners in Israeli
jails now some of those were convicted
some were on the the detention without
trial and the capture of a soldier was a
precious commodity if I can put it that
way a bargaining chip in which you would
get these cases reviewed I think the
answer to it for me would have been for
Israel to after the Shalit deal to have
introduced a review system of all cases
and have had an independent review of
all the convicted Palestinian prisoners
in Israeli jail so that there could be
some hope of people being released at
present there's no hope for many of
them murnan absolutely fascinating to
get your behind the scenes expertise
thank you very much for coming on the
program thank you leas and let's hope
the news tonight is the beginning of
something that will be ongoing and all
of those hostages will be returned to
their families Oliver mcturner thank
you I just want to bring you an update
to this uh in the last few minutes CBS
News which is the BBC's media partner in
uh the US then are reporting uh the two
hostages are being released by Hamas an
Israeli government official has
confirmed to CBS News uh the names of
the two as well so uh just to outline
exactly how the process of verification
and Confirmation in these kind of
situations works we had initially the
statement on social media by Hamas
through Hamas uh media channels uh which
we then take and clearly investigate we
don't take that on its own uh the way
that media organizations work around the
world and BBC included is you have
Partnerships with different with other
uh media organizations ours in the US is
CBS news they have spoken to an Israel
government official uh confirming to CBS
News uh the names of the hostages and in
terms of how this plays out last week
when we had the first two uh um hostages
being released released uh after the CBS
News confirmation BBC did independently
uh confirm a pretty short time after
that too uh right let's take a look at
another post that's just come up on uh
social media you can see from the
icrc let's see what they saying about it
we facilitated the release of two more
hostages transporting them out of Gaza
this evening our role as a neutral
intermediary makes this work possible
and we are ready to facilitate any
further release we hope that they will
soon be back with their loved ones and
to re reiterate what happened the last
time last week with two hostages was a
similar uh process and it wasn't until
uh that they were confirmed safe on
Israeli territory that we then heard
from uh officials and authorities in
Israel confirming things like uh name
and status of the two hostages so we
will wait and see if and when uh that
happens but clearly more confirmation
coming through that two two Israeli
hostages uh have been released by Hamas
we're going to keep across all those
details for you and when of course the
BBC established our own independent
verification we'll bring that to you as
well